What color is our paragraph text
gonna be in this example here?
So we've got a div class of blue,
inside of that div, there's a paragraph.
And our style rule here is class blue
equals, not equals but color blue.
So what color is our
paragraph text is gonna be?
>> Still gonna be blue.
>> You think it's gonna be blue?
Indeed it is gonna be blue, if you can
see that text has changed to blue,
I know that's not the most
accessible blue color.
Do we know why that's gonna be blue?
>> Cuz it applies to itself and
all of its children children elements?
>> Yeah, that's pretty close, yeah.
So, it's due to this concept
called inheritance, yeah.
>> Automatically inherits.
>> Inheritance, so this occurs when an
inheritable property like color is not set
directly on the element itself.
But the parent chain is gonna be
traversed up until it finds a value for
that property.
Okay, another one.
What happens now?
So now we've got two style rules here.
We've got paragraph color red,
that's the type selector,
and then we've got a class
selector with color blue.
It could be two options,
so which one do we say?
You got a 50% chance.
>> I'll say red.
>> Yeah, the paragraph is-
>> Say red.
>> Yeah, enforced now to be in red.
>> Yeah, totally right.
So, do we know why?
>> I'm assuming because it goes
up the inheritance tree until it
finds the first match
>> It doesn't actually need
to traverse the tree in this case, right?
Because our paragraph has a declared
style rule, but it would.
So, if there was no selector that matched
that paragraph, it would traverse up and
look for, okay, maybe the direct
parent has a color set on there.
Okay, last one.
So now again we've got our two selectors,
but
any guess what the color
now is going to be?
>> Blue.
>> Blue, yes, absolutely.
You wanna guess why?
>> It's the stronger specifier,
I guess I would say.
>> Stronger specifier, yeah,
totally true it has a higher specificity.
>> Yeah.
>> Absolutely, and
we're going to learn what that
means right now actually.
So specificity is that algorithm that our
browsers are using to determine what CSS
declaration should be applied.
So every selector that we write
has a calculated weight, and
it's kinda like a survival of the fittest,
the most specific weight wins.
It does get a little bit technical, so
you don't need to memorize
how this calculation is run.
I think the more practice you get,
the more easily identifiable
these things will become.
And it really only matters if you
have two selectors that are trying to
style the same exact element,
that's when this really comes into play.
So, when we calculate specificity,
we use a three column approach here.
For every ID selector,
we add 1 to the ID column.
For every class selector we
add a 1 in the class column.
And for every type selector,
we add a 1 in the type column.
Now, the ID column is the most specific,
followed by class, and then by type.
And to get that specificity value,
we're gonna add up the values of all of
the columns to get the final
specificity weight.
So, let's take an example.
So, given the specificity
calculation rules,
we can calculate the specificity of this,
and we'll do the first one together.
So, the first selector
is a class selector,
so we're selecting all
elements with a class of body.
So that's gonna put a 1
in the class column.
And then we are also targeting
the type selector for paragraphs,
so you get a 1 and the type column.
So this is gonna give us
a specificity of 0-1-1.
Does anyone wanna take a guess
what this one might be?
So remember it's id class type.
>> 2 for in the class column, and
then 1 in the selector column?
>> Yeah, 1 in the type column,
>> Type colomn, yeah.
>> Yes, so, yep, it's gonna be 0-2-1.
There are no ID selectors,
there are two class selectors, and
one type selector, yep.
Okay, last one.
Anyone wanna guess what
this specificity will be?
>> 1-1-0?
>> 1-1-0, absolutely it is.
We have one ID and one class.
Now, the caveat here, inline styles.
Inline styles have a higher specificity
than the ID selector, and we just said,
ID is the highest specificity column,
right?
But inline styles overrule that.
So let's take an example.
In our CSS, we are styling an element
that has an ID of text to be red.
But we can see in our HTML here,
we've got style equals color blue.
Now because inline styles override IDs,
it's going to be blue.
Now, there's also this
notation called important.
So this marks the style rule as
important of all things, right?
It's gonna override all the other styles.
So what might that look like in practice?
So we still have our style equals color
blue in line, but now we've got the ID
selector text, we're setting the color
to red, and noting it as important.
So this takes precedence,
and the text will be red.
Now, adding this important declaration
can make it really difficult to
create maintainable CSS code.
And it might actually be necessary to use
it when you're working with third party
libraries or CSS libraries,
just the way that they're structured.
But always try to write a higher
specificity selector instead of
adding important.
You can add important if
you're trying to debug, right?
But generally it's better practice
to not ship this to production.
So specificity calculations, again,
are gonna come into play when you have
multiple selectors trying
to style the same element.
If there are two or more declarations that
provide different property values for
the same element, so if we have two
selectors trying to style the color of one
element, the most specific selector wins.
>> Let's say a selector
has more than ten classes,
will this selector be
more specific than an ID?
>> No, the ID selector wins.
So if there's one ID
that will overrule ten.
I can show you a little
trick to calculating this.
If you're curious,
there's a specificity calculator.
So let's say we have one,
we'll call it ID.
And then let's say we've got class1,
I'm not gonna do ten,
we'll do like four,
class2, class3, class4.
But the question as well is this
one element with four classes,
or is it gonna be four spaces separated,
right?
So four children.
If we click sort by specificity,
you can see ID is still on top, so
it's still gonna be the most specific.
But that was a great question.
It's not the quantity in the column,
it's, we start at ID,
if there is an ID on one element and
not on a second, the first element wins.
But you can use this tool, if you're
uncertain, you can plug these in.
Yeah, Mark.
>> Do media queries add points?
>> That's a great question.
I think the answer is no,
I'm not a hundred percent certain.
We will see pseudo classes,
and is it pseudo elements?
In a later chapter, we're gonna
discuss how those will add weight, but
I don't believe media
queries add specificity.
Let's Google it together.
Do media queries add specificity in CSS?
They do not affect specificity according
to this random website I found on Google.
So my answer is gonna say no.
But, If we go to CSS tricks here,
does the media query increase specificity?
No, that's also a great question.
But there are a couple other
caveats to the specificity weights.
Like I mentioned pseudo classes, pseudo
elements, we'll get to those later on.
So here's an unordered list,
it contains three list items.
Each list item has a link in it.
So given the following CSS,
what color will the links be?
We're gonna walk through this together.
I know it might be a little
bit hard to see this,
we're gonna zoom in on
some of the CSS code here.
This is what the output looks like.
So links 1 and 3 will be blue,
and link 2 will be red.
But let's actually walk through how,
how does this come to fruition?
So, the first selector.
We're going to tackle the second
link here, the one that's red,
we're gonna figure out why it's red.
So, the first selector has one type,
so it's weight is 0-0-1.
The second selector also has a one type,
so it's 0-0-1 as well.
The third selector has one in each column,
so one ID, one class, one type selector.
The fourth selector has one type and
one class, so that's 0-1-1.
The next one has one ID and one type.
And the last one has one ID,
one type, and one class.
So I know that's a lot, and you won't
have to probably do this day to day.
But it's good to understand
how these are calculated.
So when we zoom back out, these are the
weights that we're working with here.
So now let's just look at the styles or
the selectors that are aiming
to style the second link.
So if we start in that left column,
that ID column that I just mentioned,
let's compare which selectors has
the highest ID column weight.
So three of our selectors have
a one in the ID column, so
that's gonna be the third, fifth,
and sixth if my math is correct.
So, all these three selectors
still have a 1 in the ID column.
We move one space to the right,
to the class column,
they also all have a 1
in the class column.
So now we move to the third column,
the type column.
So we can see here, just the third and
the sixth selector have
a 1 in the type column.
But these selectors are tied.
So, the first one is trying to style
this link with a color of yellow, and
the second one is attempting to
style it with a color of red.
If two or more selectors have the same
weight, the most recent one wins when
you're reading it from top
to bottom on your file.
So because the bottom one is
at the bottom, it wins, and so
the color of this link is going to be red.
But what about the other links?
What colors are those gonna be?
Selectors one, two and
four are the selectors attempting to
style the rest of our list items.
So we can follow that same methodology
of calculating the weight,
starting with the ID column,
they all have zeros.
In the class column, you can see,
number four has 1 in the class column.
So that wins and
the rest of the links will be blue.
But there's something
a little bit odd here.
Why is the dot for link two still blue?
So this is because we're only setting
the style of the link element and
not the actual list item, right?
So the list item, that dot,
it's going to inherit that color blue.
So like I had mentioned for one of
the questions, there is a specificity
calculator, so if you've got a couple of
selectors you're uncertain which one is
the most specific, you can plop them
in here, and it'll help you out.
So, we've learned about the history of
CSS, we've learned about different types
of elements, replaced,
non-replaced, block, and inline.
We learned a little bit more about
selectors, specificity, and inheritance.
So next step, in the next chapter we're
gonna start building our project, but
before that we'll learn some of
the skills needed for that first portion.